---
date: 2020-09-07 14:04:03
title: Hypothesis Testing
id: 2020-09-07t14-04-03z
---

In statistics, hypothesis testing is a method for evaluating hypotheses.
A hypothesis is a proposed explanation for an observed phenomenon.

The way hypothesis testing works is in a way analogous to how proof by
contradiction works [@goldmanBasicsHypothesisTests2018].

Unlike proof by contradiction though, the conclusions obtained via hypothesis
testing do not underline some _absolute_ truth. This is by nature of
statistics, which is inherently inferential and approximate.

In proof by contradiction,

- we are interested in a _candidate statement_ which we
  want to _demonstrate to be false_
- we start by assuming the statement to be true
- we then seek for a contradiction to this statement
  - if we demonstrate a contradiction, then we will have proven the candidate
    statement to be false
  - if we fail to find a contradiction, then we will have _failed to prove_ the
    statement to be false.

Analogously, in hypothesis testing,

- we have a _null hypothesis_, which we seek to reject so to instead accept an
  opposing _alternative hypothesis_
- we start by assuming the null hypothesis to be true
- we then make a number of observations, collecting data on the outcomes so to
  estimate the probability of the observed outcomes, assuming that nothing
  observed is extraordinary
  - if what we observe has a probability lower than some _significance
    threshold_ which we define in advance, then we conclude that this is
    evidence that our assumptions (null hypothesis) are incorrect (false) and
    we must reject them, accepting the alternative hypothesis instead [^1].
  - otherwise, we fail to reject our null hypothesis. This does not mean we
    accept the null hypothesis.
    - after all, the null hypothesis is nothing but a "tool" for producing
      a "proof" by contradiction, or better, for coming to statistical conclusions.

Here is a table that may be useful in seeing the analogy

| **Proof By Contradiction**            | **Hypothesis Testing**              |
| ------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------- |
| Candidate Statement (CS)              | Null Hypothesis (NH)                |
| we want to prove CS to be false       | we want to reject NH                |
| assume CS to be true                  | assume NH to be true                |
| seek for contradiction                | collect data on phenomenon          |
| contradiction found -> prove CS false | probability < $\alpha$ -> reject NH |
| otherwise -> fail to prove CS false   | otherwise -> fail to reject NH      |

[^1]:
  Rejecting the null hypothesis does not necessarily mean accepting the
  alternative hypothesis.

    - This is because the null hypothesis also assumes an underlying distribution,
      which is assumed in the alternative hypothesis too.
    - As such, rejecting the null hypothesis either means that indeed there is
      something unusual that warrants an acceptance of a new (alternative
      hypothesis) _or_ that the original distribution which we chose was actually
      wrong.

## References
