---
date: 2020-08-24 15:19:14
title: The Zettelkasten - how to take smart notes
id: 2020-08-24t15-19-14z
---

The Zettelkasten is a system for taking notes and knowledge management made
famous by prolific German sociologist [Niklas
Luhman](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Niklas_Luhmann) and summarised to
a modern audience by Sonke Ahrens in his book "How to Take Smart Notes"
[@ahrensHowTakeSmart2017]. The underlining principle of the system is to act as
a second brain, facilitating connections and discovery of insights. The method
can be summarised in the following steps:

1. Whenever you think of something, a fleeting thought, write it down in
   a collection of notes known as your _fleeting notes_.
2. Whenever you read/watch/listen for knowledge, ensure you are doing so with
   a pen in hand so that you can actively take notes on it using your own words.
   Keep this collection of notes closely linked to a reference system, forming
   together your literature notes.
3. Make _permanent notes_ ( _zettels_ ), as soon as possible. Ensure that
   - you ask yourself how these new ideas relate to your existing notes.
   - you have only one idea per note.
   - the notes are atomic: they can be read independently of other notes
   - the notes are resilient: they are written well enough to still be
     understood far in the future.
4. "Position" the new zettels within your notes, the slip-box, the Zettelkasten:
   - add links when possible.
   - use [index notes and structure notes](./2020-08-26t20-38-25z.md) to facilitate navigation.
   - use [tags](./2020-08-26t20-49-24z.md) for better future retrieval

## References
