---
date: 2020-10-03 19:44:59
title: How to get Startup Ideas
id: 2020-10-03t19-44-59z
---

[Notes from PG's essay](http://www.paulgraham.com/startupideas.html)

- startups usually
  - are something the founders want
  - are something the founders can build
  - are something that few others realize has worth

- look for problems rather than ideas. Ideally problems you personally deal
  with.
  - this is to ensure that the problem actually exists.
  - doing the opposite (looking for ideas), usually results in bad ideas, ideas
    that are plausible enough to fool you in working on them, even though the
    problem may not exist.
    - the danger of these ideas is that they are difficult to catch as being
      useless, because they seem plausible.
  - if all you know about a startup idea is that it sounds plausible, it is
    better to assume that it is bad, because most plausible ideas are bad.

- There is another balance to hit: instead of making something many people are
  somewhat interested in, make something a few people are _very_ interested in,
  almost desperate to use.
  - ask yourself: who wants my product so much that they would use a crappy
    version of it made by an unknown startup? 
    - if you can't answer that, then perhaps it is not a good startup idea.

- OK, but this way our product risks just being a niche, how do we discern
  whether there is a path leading outwards, leading to growth beyond a niche?
  - Well, truth is, it's hard to tell, and just part of the risks you take as
    a founder. 
  - If you're at the leading edge of the field, your intuition is probably
    right.

- The takeaway then, really, is that there isn't a recipe for coming up with
  startup ideas, but rather a mindset. One doesn't "think up" startups. One
  _notices_ the gaps for them. An observant mindset, open to new possibilities
  in the world, will be able to notice these gaps.
  - One does not necessarily even need to be in the leading-edge; becoming
    leading-edge is feasible within a year for many things. For the life-span
    of a startup, that is a reasonable time investment.

- How do we notice?
  - ask yourself what's missing from your field/the world
    - don't take the current state of the world for granted.
    - pay attention to [things that bother you](./2020-12-04t21-38-14z.md)
    - see the obvious that isn't so obvious: the problem and solution you find
      should seem obvious in retrospect
      - It's a weird process, admittedly
  - don't ask yourself "Could this be a big business?"
  - We need a loose mind for the above. [Floating Attention](./2020-08-28t17-40-26z.md)
    - keep a background process running, rather than facing the issue of coming
      up with an idea head-on.
      - that's just not how ideas are formed.
  - Give yourself time. Don't fret. Pressure will only make it worse.
    - A rushed idea is probably not the best
  - Work on projects that seem like they would be cool
    - you'll practice building things that are missing.
    - many startup ideas started off as "toys". "Toys" may matter more than they
      seem. 
 
 > Live in the future and build what seems interesting.
 
- Another tactic is to work on the boundary of fields, the "clash of domains".
  - This will allow you to better see the gaps in each domain, since you'll
    be both an insider and an outsider to both.

- Don't build while aiming to start a startup. Just build
  - that's premature optimization otherwise.

- Don't worry about competition and being "late"
  - it's rare for startups to be killed by competitors.
    - success depends much more on you than on competitors.
  - focus on users, not competitors.
  - a crowded market is actually a good sign
    - there's demand
    - there isn't an optimal solution yet
